## A Source-Oriented Approach to Coal Combustion PM2.5 Health Effects

There is increasing evidence that particulate air pollution originating from different sources impacts health differently. Several studies have found exposure to fine particulate matter from coal combustion emissions has a stronger association with negative health outcomes than other sources. A central challenge to attributing air pollution exposure to pollution sources is long-range transport: air pollution moves, often at great distances, from emitting sources to exposed populations. Existing methods have typically focused on identifying health impacts of broad categories of sources, usually through source apportion methods that infer source categories from the chemical composition of particles measured at certain population locations. While valuable, focus on broad source categories limits the utility of these methods to address the relationship between emissions from specific point sources and health. In this paper, we deploy a novel statistical analysis method to more directly isolate the association between fine particulate matter originating from coal-fired power plants and health. Specifically, we use Hybrid Single Particle Lagrangian Integrated Trajectory (HYSPLIT) simulations to directly estimate the influence of individual power plants on populations in the Northeast and Midwest United States. We utilize propensity score matching to match highly exposed locations to suitable controls and then estimate the impact of high exposure to coal emissions on ischemic heart disease hospitalizations in the Medicare population in 2003.
