## Causal Inference Methods for Estimating Long Term Health Effects of Air Quality Regulations

The regulatory environment surrounding air pollution control policies warrants a new type of epidemiological evidence. Whereas air pollution epidemiology has typically informed policies with estimates of exposure-response relationships between pollution and health outcomes, these estimates alone cannot support current debates surrounding the actual health impacts of air quality regulations. Directly evaluating specific control strategies is distinct from estimating exposure-response, and increased emphasis on estimating the effectiveness of well-defined regulatory interventions will enhance the evidence supporting policy decisions. The goal of this report is to provide new analytic perspectives and statistical methods for what we refer to as direct accountability assessment of the effectiveness of specific air quality regulatory interventions. Towards this end, we sharpen many of the distinctions surrounding accountability assessment initially raised in HEI Accountability Working Group (2003) through discussion, development, and deployment of statistical methods for drawing causal inferences from observational data. The methods and analyses presented here are unified in their focus on anchoring accountability assessment to estimating the causal consequences of well-defined actions or interventions. We discuss these analytic perspectives in the context of two direct accountability case studies considering different links of the so-called “Chain of Accountability” (HEI Accountability Working Group, 2003).
The statistical methods described herein consist of both established methods for drawing causal inference with observational data and of newly-developed methodology for causal accountability assessment. We sharpen the analytic distinctions between studies that directly evaluate the effectiveness of specific policies and those that estimate the exposure-response relationship between pollution and health. We emphasize how a potential-outcomes paradigm for causal inference can elevate current policy debates with more direct evidence of the extent to which complex regulatory interventions impact pollution and health outcomes. We outline the potential outcomes perspective and promote its use as a means to frame observational studies as approximate randomized experiments. Newly-developed methods for causal accountability assessment draw upon propensity scores, principal stratification, causal mediation analysis, spatial hierarchical models, and Bayesian estimation. The first of two illustrative case studies uses health outcomes among approximately 4 million Medicare beneficiaries to estimate the causal health impacts of areas being designated as in nonattainment with the 1987 National Ambient Air Quality Standards for PM10. The second case study quantifies the extent to which SO2 scrubbers on coal-fired power plants causally affect emissions of SO2 , NOx , and CO2 , as well as the extent to which causal emissions reductions mediate the causal effect of a scrubber on ambient concentrations of PM2.5 . Both case studies are anchored to our compilation of national, linked data on ambient air quality monitoring, weather, population demographics, Medicare hospitalization and mortality outcomes, continuous emissions monitoring for electricity-generating units, and a variety of regulatory control interventions. The resulting database has unprece- dented accuracy and granularity for conducting the types of accountability assessment contained in this report, and a key component of our methods development for accountability assessment is the creation of tools for distribution of our linked data base and for reproducible research.
