## Health Effects of Power Plant Emissions Mediated through Ambient PM2.5

Emissions from coal burning power plants are a major source of ambient air pollution that has been linked to various adverse health outcomes. As a consequence, many air quality control strategies targeting U.S. power plant emissions have been adopted in recent decades. Despite noticeable reductions in emissions and the improvement of air quality since promulgation of programs such as the Acid Rain Program, uncertainty remains about the precise role of emission-reduction strategies for impacting public-health. In accordance with the so-called "chain of accountability" (HEI Accountability Working Group, 2003), we provide the first epidemiological assessment of the extent to which health effects of power plant emissions of (SO2) are mediated through changes in the ambient PM2.5. 
We use data on 26236 zip codes in the Eastern U.S. to estimate causal links between SO2 emissions from coal-fired power plants (the "treatment"), ambient PM2.5, concentrations (the "mediator"), and cardiovascular- and respiratory-hospitalization rates and all-cause mortality rate (the outcomes).  Zip-code level mortality and hospitalization rates come from U.S. Medicare beneficiaries and zip-code level measures ambient PM2.5, are derived from a data-fusion approach anchored to ambient monitoring data, remote sensing, etc. A central challenge for obtaining zip-code level SO2, emissions estimates is accommodation of long-range pollution transport: emissions from power plants react in the atmosphere and travel across great distances towards transformation into harmful ambient pollution.  Thus, we develop a novel strategy based on the Hybrid Single Particle Lagrangian Integrated Trajectory (HYSPLIT) model developed by the Netional Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) to link power plant emissions to zip-codes. 
The analysis approach is anchored to a potential-outcomes framework for causal inference to define estimands of interest, leveraging a newly-developed Bayesian nonparametric method to provide flexible models to the observed data in two analyses: principal stratification analysis and mediation analysis. Both approaches are anchored to the same observed data models and combine different assumptions towards quantifying the effects related to the extent to which health effects of elevated SO2, emissions are attributable to changes in ambient PM2.5, vs. the extent to which elevated SO2, emissions directly affect public health outcomes.

### Keywords
Ambient PM2.5, Air mass trajectories, Gaussian Copula, Natural indirect effects
