## Investigating the Performance of Propensity Score Approaches for Differential Item Functioning Analysis

To evaluate the performance of propensity score approaches for differential item functioning (DIF) analysis, this simulation study was conducted to assess bias, mean square error, Type I error, and power under different levels of effect size as well as a variety of model misspecification conditions, including different types of covariates and missing patterns of covariates. The results suggest that for no-DIF and uniform DIF scenarios, propensity score methods have less bias, smaller MSE, less Type I error, and higher power in general than the conventional logistic regression DIF method when including covariates that are moderately and/or highly related to both outcome and grouping variables. However, propensity score methods were found to perform no better than the conventional method in the presence of non-uniform DIF.It is well known that one major advantage of randomized experimental study designs over quasi-experimental or observational designs is that random assignment tends to make treatment groups comparable, i.e., balanced over both observed and unobserved covariates. However, randomized experiments are not always feasible or ethical in many fields, and so quasi-experimental or observational designs are widely used instead. In order to approximate causal inferences, propensity score matching have been recommended and applied in medical, epidemiological and economic research, and these methods have lately been extended to social, psychological and educational research (e.g., Austin, 2008; Guo & Fraser, 2010; Hong & Raudenbush, 2005; Thoemmes & Kim, 2011).The popularity of propensity score methods has given rise to the application of propensity score in differential item functioning (DIF) analysis. There are a few studies that have recommended and demonstrated the application of the propensity score approach in DIF analysis (Joldersma & Bowen, 2010; Bowen, 2011; Lee & Geisinger, 2014; Liu, et al., 2016). However, none of these studies have systematically investigated under what conditions and to what degree propensity score DIF methods perform better than conventional DIF methods. This paper aims to address this current gap in the literature.
The purpose of this study is to compare the performance of DIF analysis methods based on propensity score approaches with that of conventional logistic regression DIF analysis under different levels of effect size and in the presence of different selections of covariates and a variety of model misspecification conditions. In addition, logistic regression DIF analysis with covariance adjustment is also included for comparison as it is an alternative method to matching. Covariance adjustment regression analysis allows one to include confounders and, hence, adjust for the confounding effects in DIF analysis. However, this method may not be able to give a reliable adjustment on the differences in the observed covariates when there are substantial differences in the distribution of the covariates between the two groups (Cochran, 1957; Rubin, 2001). A detailed description can be found in Liu, et al. (2016). The paper is organized as follows: (i) a review of propensity score matching and two important issues related to its application, (ii) a review of previous studies on the application of propensity score in DIF analysis, (iii) a brief description of logistic regression DIF analysis, (iv) a description of a Monte Carlo simulation study comparing propensity score DIF analysis methods with the conventional logistic regression DIF analysis, and (v) conclusion and discussion.
